= Strelka (Стрелка)

home :: http://deveiate.org/projects/Strelka
code :: http://bitbucket.org/ged/Strelka
github :: https://github.com/ged/strelka
docs :: http://deveiate.org/code/strelka


== Description

Strelka is a framework for creating and deploying
Mongrel2[http://mongrel2.org/] web applications in Ruby.

It's named after a lesser known {Russian
cosmonaut}[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strelka_(dog)#Belka_and_Strelka] who was
one of the first canine space travelers to orbit the Earth and return alive.
Her name means "little arrow".


== Prerequisites

* Mongrel2[http://mongrel2.org/] 1.8.0 or better
* Ruby 1.9.3 or better


== Installation

    $ gem install strelka


== Getting Started

We're going to assume you've already built and installed the Mongrel2 daemon.
If not, please refer to the  {Mongrel2
documentation}[http://mongrel2.org/wiki/quick_start.html] and get that  ready.

Mongrel2 loads its configuration from a SQLite database. You can create the 
this database in any fashion you like, but the Mongrel2 ruby module includes a
command-line tool called <tt>m2sh.rb</tt> that'll let you quickstart a server
if you just want to experiment. If you've already installed the *strelka* gem,
then it will already have been installed as a dependency.

To bootstrap a basic server, configure it, and run it:

    $ mkdir strelka-tryout
    $ cd !$
    $ m2sh.rb quickstart

This will generate a Ruby DSL config, then invoke an editor on it.

Make sure the config has a line like:

    route '/hello', handler( 'tcp://127.0.0.1:9999',  'helloworld' )

in the 'host' section; that's the part of the Mongrel2 server we'll be talking
to.

The quickstart will generate a SQLite configuration database for use with
Mongrel2 in your current working directory, with the default required directory
structure. Mongrel2 will listen on port 8113 (unless you changed it), and send
all requests starting at the URI <tt>/hello</tt> to a handler called
<tt>helloworld</tt>.

If you stop the server (Ctrl-C will do so), you can restart it like so:

    $ m2sh.rb start

Now that the Mongrel2 daemon is up and running, we can move forward and create
our first application!



=== A Minimal Application

Strelka applications are subclasses of the Strelka::App class. Strelka::App is
pretty minimal by itself; it inherits most of its behavior from the basic
Mongrel2::Handler[http://deveiate.org/code/mongrel2/Mongrel2/Handler.html]
class, only adding a few convenience methods for common HTTP tasks.

A minimal application would look something like:

    #!/usr/bin/env ruby

    require 'strelka'

    class HelloWorldApp < Strelka::App

        def handle_request( request )
            response = request.response
            response.content_type = 'text/plain'
            response.puts( "Hello, World!" )
            return response
        end

    end # class HelloWorldApp

    # Run the app
    HelloWorldApp.run if __FILE__ == $0

While functional, this application is pretty dumb, and making it do anything
more intelligent on your own would require a bunch of additional code and
accompanying tests.  Fortunately, Strelka already has done the heavy lifting.
It knows how to read the Mongrel2 configuration and hook your app up with the
right sockets to talk to the Mongrel2 front end (providing you follow one of
several simple conventions), provides hooks into the lifecycle of an HTTP
request, and includes a plugin system that uses these hooks to handle common
application tasks. This allows you to mix in the specific framework parts you
need, so you get exactly what you want and nothing more.


=== Talking to Mongrel2

Mongrel2 associates handlers with itself via an identifier, which is described
in the Mongrel2 manual as a UUID, but can actually be any string consisting of
dashes and alphanumeric characters. Strelka reads the Mongrel2 config database,
and can automatically configure its apps to talk to the right socket with the
right <tt>send_ident</tt> if it can find them. It gives you a couple of
different ways of doing this. It will default to a string derived from the name
of the class, or you can set it yourself by declaring an <tt>ID</tt> constant
in your application class. If you need more control, you can also override the
<tt>::run</tt> class method and <tt>super</tt> with the right <tt>appid</tt>:

    class HelloWorldApp
        # Run as a tester if not running in the production environment
        def self::run
            appid = if Socket.gethostname.include?( 'test' )
                    'helloworld-test'
                else
                    'helloworld'
                end

            super( appid )
        end
    end

Because our <tt>config.sqlite</tt> configuration directs requests to <tt>/</tt>
to be sent to the <tt>helloworldapp</tt> handler, Strelka will automatically
find and pair this route to Mongrel2 when run.

Run this handler, then point a browser to <tt>http://localhost:8080/</tt>.  If
you see the text "Hello, World!", congrats!  We'll build off of this in the
next section, the {Strelka Tutorial}[rdoc-ref:Tutorial.rdoc].


== Further Reading

You'll likely want to start with {the Tutorial}[rdoc-ref:Tutorial.rdoc].


== Roadmap

Going forward, we're going to be extracting useful stuff out of our own
applications as plugins, and finishing up the packaging and deployment
stories once we've ironed out the details in own environment.

Here's a tentative list of what kinds of stuff we have planned:

=== More Plugins

* CORS -- manage {Cross-Origin Resource Sharing}[http://www.html5rocks.com/en/tutorials/cors/]
  headers, especially for service applications
* caching -- utilities for easy HTTP caching

=== Deployment/Packaging

You'll be able to package up your applications as Rubygems for easy deployment.
The Strelka::App class already supports application discovery, but we
want to hook that up to the 'strelka' command line tool so you can install
and run them with a minimum of manual monkeying around with directories,
migrations, etc.

=== New Application Styles

Create some new handler classes for different application styles, similar to
those in the Tir[http://tir.mongrel2.org/] framework.

=== Chunked Encoding

Support for sending partial responses via the Chunked encoding.


== Contributing

You can check out the current development source with Mercurial via its
{project page}[http://bitbucket.org/ged/Strelka]. Or if you prefer Git, via 
{its Github mirror}[https://github.com/ged/strelka].

After checking out the source, run:

    $ rake newb

This task will install any missing dependencies, run the tests/specs,
and generate the API documentation.


== License

Copyright (c) 2011-2013, Michael Granger and Mahlon E. Smith
All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
  and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

* Neither the name of the author/s, nor the names of the project's
  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this
  software without specific prior written permission.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.


